ôÙ ill learn something. You are palpating this page
with your eyes simply ôÙbecause this is the kind of action that w
ôÙ ill resolve uncertainty about what you ôÙwill see next andã€”ôÙindeedã€”ôÙwhat tôÙ hese words convey.
In short, Active Inference puts the action into perception, whereby perception
is treated as perceptual inference or hypothesis testing. Active Inference goes
even further and considers planning as inferenceã€”ôÙthat is, inferring what you
would do next to resolve uncertainty about your lived world.
To illustrate the simplicity of Active Inferenceã€”ôÙand what we are trying to explainã€”ôÙplace your fingertips ôÙgently on your leg. Keep them tôÙhere
motionless for a second or two. Now, does your leg feel rough or smooth?
If you had to move your finôÙgers to evince a feeling of roughness or smoothness, you have discovered a fundament of Active Inference. To feel is to
palpate. To see is to look. To hear is to listen. This palpation does not necessarily have to be overtã€”we can act covertly by directing our attention to
this or that. In short, we are not simply trying to make sense of our sensations; we have to actively create our sensorium. In what follows, we ôÙwill
see why this has to be the case and why everyôÙthing that we perceive, do, or
plan is in the compass of one existential imperativeã€”ôÙself-ôÙevidencing.
Active Inference is not just about reading or epistemic foraging. It is, on
one view, something that all creatures and particles do, in virtue of their
existence. This might sound like a strong claim; however, it speaks to the
fact that Active Inference inherits from a fôÙ ree energy princiôÙple that equates
existence with self-ôÙevidencing and self-ôÙevidencing with an enactive sort of

Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/oa-monograph-pdf/2246566/book_9780262369978.pdf by guest on 24 March 2026

viii

Preface

inference. However, this book is not concerned with the physics of sentient
systems. Its focus is on the implications of this physics for understanding
how the brain works.
This understanding is not an easy business, as witnessed by millennia of
natuôÙral philosophy and centuries of neuroscience. Although one can find
the roots of Active Inference in first princiôÙple accounts of self-ôÙorganized
beôÙhavôÙior (i.e., variational princiôÙples akin to Hamiltonã€™s princiôÙple of stationary
action), first princiôÙples do not help very much when asking how a parôÙticôÙuôÙlar
brain works and how it differs from another brain. For example, committing
to the theory of evolution by natuôÙral seôÙlection does not help in the slightest
when it comes to understanding why I have two eyes or speak French. This
book is about using princiôÙples to scaffold key questions in neuroscience and
artificial intelligence. To do this, we have to move beyond princiôÙples and get
to grips with the mechanics to which the princiôÙples apply.
As such, Active Inferenceã€”ôÙand its accompanying Bayesian mechanicsã€”
is ôÙthere to frame questions about how we perceive, plan, and act. Crucially,
it does not aim to replace other frameworks, such as behavioral psyôÙcholôÙogy,
decision theory, and reinforcement learning. Rather, it hopes to embrace
all tôÙ hose approaches that have proven so successful within a unified framework. In what follows, we w
ôÙ ill pay special attention to linking key constructs from psyôÙcholôÙogy, cognitive neuroscience, enactivism, ethology, and
so on to the calculus of belief updating in Active Inferenceã€”ôÙand its associated proôÙcess theories.
By proôÙcess theories, we refer to theories about how belief updating is realized by neuronal (and other biophysical) proôÙcesses in the embodied brain
and beyond. Work to date in Active Inference offers a fairly straightforward
set of computational architectures and simulation tools to both model variôÙ
ous aspects of a functioning brain and enable ôÙpeople to test hypotheses
about difôÙferôÙent computational architectures. However, ôÙthese tools only solve
half the probôÙlem. At the heart of Active Inference lies a generative modelã€”ôÙ
namely, a probabilistic repreôÙsenôÙtaôÙtion of how unobservable côÙ auses in the
world out ôÙthere generate the observable consequencesã€”ôÙour sensations.
Getting the generative model rightã€”as an apt explanation for the sentient
beôÙhavôÙior of any experimental subject or creatureã€”is the big challenge.
This book tries to explain how to meet this challenge. The first part sets
up the basic ideas and formalisms that are called on in the second partã€”to
illustrate how they can be applied in practice. In short, this book is for

Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/oa-monograph-pdf/2246566/book_9780262369978.pdf by guest on 24 March 2026

Preface

ix

ôÙpeople who want to use Active Inference to simulate and model sentient
beôÙhavôÙior, in the serôÙvice of eôÙ ither scientific inquiry or, possibly, artificial
intelligence. Thus it focuses on ôÙthose ideas and procedures that are necessary to understand and implement an Active Inference scheme without
getting distracted by the physics of sentient systems on the one hand or
philosophy on the other.
A Note from Karl Friston
I have a confession to make. I did not write much of this book. Or, more
precisely, I was not allowed to. This bookã€™s agenda calls for a crisp and clear
writing style that is beyond me. Although I was allowed to slip in a few of
my favorite words, what follows is a testament to Thomas and Giovanni,
their deep understanding of the issues at hand, and, importantly, their
theory of mindã€”in all senses.
AcknowlôÙedgments
We gratefully acknowledge invaluable input from our friends and
ôÙcolleaguesã€”in parôÙticôÙuôÙlar, past and preôÙsent members of the Theoretical
Neurobiology group at the Wellcome Centre for ôÙHuman Neuroimaging,
University College London; the Cognition in Action (CONAN) Lab at the
Institute of Cognitive Sciences and Technologies, National Research Council
of Italy; and numerous international collaborators who have been integral
to the development of the ideas presented in this book. This young but
growing community has been more than generous in providing both intellectual support and motivation. Furthermore, we gratefully acknowledge
Robert Prior and Anne-ôÙMarie Bono from MIT Press for kindly accompanying
and advising us during the preparation of this book and Jakob Hohwy and
other thoughtful reviewers for their guidance. FiôÙnally, we thank the funding
agencies that provided financial support for our research: KJF was funded by
a Wellcome Trust Principal Research Fellowship (Ref: 088130/Z/09/Z); GP
was funded by the EuôÙroôÙpean Research Council ôÙunder the Grant Agreement
No. 820213 (ThinkAhead) and the EuôÙroôÙpean Unionã€™s Horizon 2020 Framework Programme for Research and Innovation ôÙunder the Specific Grant
Agreement No. 945539 (ôÙHuman Brain ProjôÙect SGA3).

Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/oa-monograph-pdf/2246566/book_9780262369978.pdf by guest on 24 March 2026

Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/oa-monograph-pdf/2246566/book_9780262369978.pdf by guest on 24 March 2026

I

Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/oa-monograph-pdf/2246566/book_9780262369978.pdf by guest on 24 March 2026

Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/oa-monograph-pdf/2246566/book_9780262369978.pdf by guest on 24 March 2026

1

Overview

Chance fôÙ avors the prepared mind.
ã€”ôÙLouis Pasteur

1.1 Introduction
This chapter introduces the main question that Active Inference seeks
to address: How do living organisms persist while engaging in adaptive
exchanges with their environment? We discuss the motivation for addressing
this question from a normative perspective, which starts from first princiôÙples
and then unpacks their cognitive and biological implications. Furthermore,
this chapter briefly introduces the structure of the book, including its subdivision into two parts: the first of which aims to help readers understand
Active Inference, and the second of which aims to help them use it in their
own research.
1.2 How Do Living Organisms Persist and Act Adaptively?
Living organisms constantly engage in reciprocal interactions with their
environment (including other organisms). They emit actions that change
the environment and receive sensory observations from it, as schematically
illustrated in figure 1.1.
Living organisms can only maintain their bodily integrity by exerting
adaptive control over the action-ôÙperception loop. This means acting to solicit
sensory observations that ôÙeither correspond to desired outcomes or goals
(e.g., the sensations that accompany secure nutrients and shelter for ôÙsimple

Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/oa-monograph-pdf/2246566/book_9780262369978.pdf by guest on 24 March 2026

4

Observation

Action
Figure 1.1
An action-ôÙperception cycle reciprocally connecting a creature and its environment.
The term environment is intentionally generic. In the examples that we discuss, it can
include the physical world, the body, the social environment, and so on.

organisms, or friends and jobs for more complex ones) or help in making
sense of the world (e.g., informing the organism about its surroundings).
Engaging in adaptive action-ôÙperception loops with the environment
poses formidable challenges to living organisms. This is largely due to the