2012). However, all of this is based on one ­simple rule. To illustrate this rule,
we consider an example of Bayesian perceptual inference (figure 2.1). Imagine a person who has a strong belief that she is confronted with an apple.
This belief corresponds to a prior probability, or prior for short. This prior
comprises the probability attributed to the apple hypothesis and the probability assigned to alternative hypotheses. In this example, our alternative
hypothesis is that it is not an apple but a frog. Numerically, the prior probability distribution assigns 0.9 to apple and 0.1 to frog. Note that, as we have
assumed that ­there are only two plausible (mutually exclusive) hypotheses,
they must sum to one. The person is also equipped with a likelihood model,
which assigns a high probability to the fact that frogs jump, whereas apples
do not. This likelihood specifies the (probabilistic) mapping from the two
hidden states (frog or apple) to the two observations (jumps or does not

Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/oa-monograph-pdf/2246566/book_9780262369978.pdf by guest on 24 March 2026

The Low Road to Active Inference

17

Box 2.1
The sum and product rules of probability
Probabilistic reasoning is underwritten by two key rules: the sum and product
rules of probability, which are as follows (respectively):

∑ P(x) = 1
x

P(x)P(y | x) = P(x, y)
The sum rule says that the probability of all pos­si­ble events (x) must sum
(or integrate) to one. The product rule says that the joint probability of two
random variables (x and y) may be decomposed into the product of the probability of one variable (P(x)) and the conditional probability of the second variable given the first (P( y | x)). A conditional probability is the probability of one
variable (­here, y) if we know the value that the other variable (­here, x) takes.
We can develop two impor­tant results from ­these s­ imple rules. The first is
the operation of marginalization. The second is Bayes’ rule. Marginalization
allows us to obtain a distribution of just one of the two variables from a joint
distribution:
P(x, y) = ∑ P( y)P(x | y) = P( y)∑ P(x | y) = P( y)
∑
!#####"#####$ !####"####$
x

x

x

Product rule

Sum rule

The probability of y is referred to as a marginal probability, and we refer
to this operation as marginalizing out x. Bayes’ rule may be obtained directly
from the product rule:
P(x)P(y | x) = P(x, y) = P( y)P(x | y)
!##"##
$
!##"##
$
Product rule

Product rule

This lets us translate between a prior and conditional distribution (likeli­
hood) and the associated marginal and the other conditional distribution
(posterior). Put simply, Bayes’ rule just says that the probability of two ­things
is the probability of the first, given the second, times the probability of the second, which is the same as the probability of the second, given the first, times
the probability of the first.

jump). Together, the prior and the likelihood form the person’s generative
model.
Now imagine that the person observes that her apple-­frog jumps. Bayes’
rule tells us how to form a posterior belief from the prior, taking into
account the likelihood of jumping. This rule is expressed as follows:
P(x | y) =

P(x)P(y | x)
P(y)

(2.1)

Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/oa-monograph-pdf/2246566/book_9780262369978.pdf by guest on 24 March 2026

18

Prior beliefs
P(x = frog)

P(x = frog | y = jumps)

P(x = apple)
0.9

Observe jumping

P( y = jumps | x = apple)

P(x = apple | y = jumps)
0.9

0.1

Frogs

Likelihood model

Apples

Generative model

0.1

Posterior beliefs

0.01

P( y = jumps | x = frog)

0.99 0.81

P( y = doesn't jump | x = apple)

0.19 P( y = doesn't jump | x = frog)

Figure 2.1
A ­simple example of Bayesian inference. Upper left: The organism’s prior belief P(x)
about the object it ­will see, before having made any observations, i.e., a categorical
distribution over two possibilities, apple (with probability 0.9) and frog (with probability 0.1). Upper right: The organism’s posterior belief P(x | y ) ­after observing that the
object jumps. Posterior beliefs can be computed using Bayes’ rule u
­ nder a likelihood
function P( y | x). This is shown below the prior and posterior, and specifies that if
the object is an apple, ­there is a very small probability (0.01) that it ­will jump, while
if it is a frog, the probability that it w
­ ill jump is much higher (0.81). (The probability
bars in this figure are not exactly to scale.) In this specific case, the update from prior
to posterior is large.

Under the likelihood model in figure 2.1, the posterior probability
­
assigned to the frog is 0.9, and the probability assigned to the apple is 0.1.
As highlighted in box 2.1, the denominator of equation 2.1 may be computed by marginalizing the numerator. Using our apple-­frog example, we
take the opportunity to unpack two dif­fer­ent notions of surprise—­both of
which are impor­tant in Active Inference. The first, which we refer to simply
as surprise, is the negative log evidence, where evidence is the marginal
probability of observations. In our example, this is the negative log probability of observing anything jumping u
­ nder the generative model. Surprise
is a very impor­tant quantity from a Bayesian perspective. It is a mea­sure of
how poorly a model fits the data it tries to explain. To put this intuitively,

Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/oa-monograph-pdf/2246566/book_9780262369978.pdf by guest on 24 March 2026

The Low Road to Active Inference

19

we can work out the probability of the observed (jumping) be­hav­ior ­under
our model. Remember that this assigns a very high prior probability to apples
and a low prior probability to frogs. Thus, our marginal probability of jumping is as follows:

∑ P(x, y = jumps)
= ∑ P(x)P(y = jumps| x)

P(y = jumps) =

x

x

= P(x = frog )P(y = jumps|x = frog )

(2.2)

+ P(x = apple)P(y = jumps|x = apple)
= 0.1 × 0.81 + 0.9 × 0.01
= 0.09
This means that, ­under this model, we would only expect to observe
jumping be­hav­ior about 9 times out of 100 observations. As such, we should
be surprised to observe this if we subscribed to the model in figure 2.1. We
can quantify this in terms of surprise (ℑ). This is given by ℑ( y = jumps) =​
−ln P( y  = jumps) = −ln(0.09) = 2.4 nats.1 The bigger this number, the worse
the model as an apt explanation for the observations at hand. This lets us
compare models in relation to data. For example, consider an alternative
model, where we have a prior belief that frogs are seen 100 ­percent of the
time. Following the same steps as in equation 2.2, we calculate a surprise
of about 0.2 nats. This is a better model of t­hese data, as the observation
is much less surprising. The procedure of scoring models on the basis of
their evidence (or surprise) is often referred to as Bayesian model comparison. For more complicated models, the form of the surprise may not be so
­simple. ­Table 2.1 provides the form of the surprise (omitting constants) for
a range of probability distributions—in addition to the categorical probability in our example. Crucially, this lets us talk about surprise for probability
distributions whose support2 differs from the ­simple example used ­here.
This is impor­tant ­because the way in which sensory data are generated by
the world varies with the sort of data. We could be surprised by encountering the face of someone we did not expect to see (categorical distribution),
or we could be surprised by it being colder outside than we anticipated
(continuous distribution). T
­ able 2.1 may be seen as a portfolio of the probability distributions at our disposal when we come to construct generative
models in subsequent chapters. More generally, it makes the point that surprise is a concept that can be evaluated for any given f­ amily of probability
distributions.

Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/oa-monograph-pdf/2246566/book_9780262369978.pdf by guest on 24 March 2026

20

­Table 2.1
Probability distributions and surprise3
Distribution

Support

Surprise (ℑ)

Gaussian

x ∈!

1
i
2 (x − µ ) Π(x − µ )

Multinomial1

xi ∈(0, . . . , N )
i ∈{1, . . . , K}
∑i xi = N

− ∑ i xi ln di

Dirichlet2

xi ∈(0,1)
i ∈{1, . . . , K}
∑i xi = 1

∑i (1 − α i )ln xi

Gamma

x ∈(0,∞)

(bx + (1 − a) ln x)

Notes: 1. Special cases include categorical (K  > 2, N  =  1), binomial (K = 2, N  > 1), and
Bernoulli (K = 2, N = 1) distributions. 2. A special case is the beta distribution (K = 2).

The second notion of surprise is (slightly confusingly) referred to as Bayesian surprise. This is a mea­sure of how much we have to update our beliefs
following an observation. In other words, Bayesian surprise quantifies the
difference between a prior and a posterior probability. This raises the question of how we quantify the dissimilarity of two probability distributions.
One answer, from information theory, is to use a Kullback-­Leibler (KL) Divergence. This is defined as the average difference between two log probabilities:
DKL [Q(x)||P(x)] ! EQ ( x) [ lnQ(x) − ln P(x)]



(2.3)

The E symbol ­here indicates an average (or expectation) as outlined in
box 2.2. Using the KL-­Divergence, we can quantify the Bayesian surprise of
our example:
DKL [ P(x | y) || P(x)]

= P(x = frog | y = jumps) ( ln P(x = frog | y = jumps) − ln P(x = frog ))

+ P(x = apple | y = jumps) ( ln P(x = apple | y = jumps) − ln P(x = apple))

(2.4)

= 0.9 ( ln(0.9) − ln(0.1)) + 0.1( ln(0.1) − ln(0.9))
≈ 1.8 nats

This scores the amount of belief updating, as opposed to simply how
unlikely the observation was. To highlight the distinction between surprise
and Bayesian surprise, consider what happens if we commit to a prior belief
that we ­will always see apples. The Bayesian surprise w
­ ill be zero, as the prior

Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/oa-monograph-pdf/2246566/book_9780262369978.pdf by guest on 24 March 2026

The Low Road to Active Inference

21

Box 2.2
Expectations
It is useful to refer to the expectation of a random variable x, usually denoted
E[ x ]. This is the weighted average of all the values that the variable can assume,
weighted by their probability. For discrete random variables (that can only take
a countable number of pos­si­ble values), this is given by a weighted sum:
E[x] =

∑ xP(x)
x

For example, for a discrete (numerical) variable that can only assume two
values (1 and 2) with equal probability of 21 , this is E[x] = 1 i 21 + 2 i 21 = 23 .
For continuous random variables (that can take infinitely many values),
sums are replaced by integrals. Expectations can also be applied to functions
of random variables, as opposed to the variables directly. For example, if we
have a function f (x), where x has some continuous distribution, the expectation is defined as follows:

∫

E[ f (x)] = f (x)p(x)dx
We w
­ ill use this notation throughout this book, where the function f (x)
­will often be a log probability, or log probability ratio.

is so confident that we do not update it at all following our observations.
However, the surprise is very large (4.6 nats) as it is highly unlikely that an
apple ­will jump.
Note that while we illustrated Bayesian inference on the basis of a very
­simple generative model, it applies to generative models of any complexity.
In chapter 4 we w
­ ill highlight two forms of generative model that underwrite most applications in Active Inference.
2.3 Biological Inference and Optimality
­There are two impor­tant points that connect the above inferential scheme
to biological and psychological theories of perception. First, the inferential procedure discussed requires the interplay of top-­down pro­cesses that
encode predictions (from the prior) and bottom-up pro­cesses that encode
sensory observations (as mediated by the likelihood). This interplay of top-­
down and bottom-up pro­cesses distinguishes the inferential view from alternative approaches that only consider bottom-up pro­cesses. Furthermore, it

Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/oa-monograph-pdf/2246566/book_9780262369978.pdf by guest on 24 March 2026

22

is central in modern biological treatments of perception, such as predictive
coding (discussed in chapter 4), which is a specific algorithmic (or process-­
level) implementation of the more general (Bayesian) inference scheme discussed ­here.
Second, Bayesian inference is optimal. Optimality is defined in relation
to a cost function that is optimized (i.e., minimized), which, for Bayesian
inference, is known as variational f­ ree energy—­closely related to surprise. We
return to this in section 2.5. By explic­itly considering the full distribution
over hidden states, it naturally h
­ andles uncertainty, hence avoiding the limitations of alternative approaches that only consider point estimates of hidden
states (e.g., the mean value of x). One such alternative would be maximum
likelihood estimation, which simply selects the hidden state most likely to
have generated the data at hand. The prob­lem with this is that such estimates
ignore both the prior plausibility of the hidden state and the uncertainty
surrounding the estimation. Bayesian inference does not suffer ­these limitations. However, despite the use of surprise in objectively assessing w
­ hether
the model is fit for purpose, it is impor­tant to appreciate that inference itself
is subjective. The results of inference are not necessarily accurate in any objective sense (i.e., the organism’s belief may not actually correspond to real­ity)
for at least two impor­tant reasons. First, biological creatures operate on the
basis of l­imited computational and energetic resources, which render exact
Bayesian inference intractable.4 This requires approximations that preclude
guarantees of exact Bayesian optimality. T
­ hese approximations include the
notion of a variational posterior—­based on something called a mean field
approximation—­which is central to chapter 4.
The second reason optimality may be thought of as subjective is that
organisms operate on the basis of a subject’s generative model of how their
observations are generated, which may or may not correspond to the real
generative pro­cess that generates their observations. This is not to say that the
generative model should correspond to the generative pro­cess. In fact, ­there may
be models that afford better (e.g., simpler) explanations of the data at hand
than the pro­cesses that actually generated them—as quantified by their relative surprise. A nice example of this is illusions, for which someone finds
a simpler explanation for their visual input in relation to how the visual
stimuli have been carefully engineered by a mischievous psychophysicist.
The generative model itself may be optimized as new experience is acquired.
This may or may not converge to the generative pro­cess. Figure 2.2 illustrates

Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/oa-monograph-pdf/2246566/book_9780262369978.pdf by guest on 24 March 2026

The Low Road to Active Inference

MODEL

PROCESS

Hidden
state
x

Inferred
state

23

y

Observation

Hidden
state
x*

u
Action

Figure 2.2
Generative pro­cess and generative model. Both represent ways in which sensory data
( y) could be generated given hidden states (x) and are represented through arrows
from x to y to indicate causality. The difference is that the pro­cess is the true causal
structure by which data are generated, while the model is a construct used to draw
inferences about the c­ auses of data (i.e., use observations to derive inferred states).
The hidden states of the generative model and the generative pro­cess are not the
same. The organism’s model includes a range of hypotheses (x) about the hidden
state, which do not necessarily include the true value of the hidden state x∗ of the
generative pro­cess. In other words, the models we use to explain our sensorium may
include hidden states that do not exist in the outside world, and vice versa. Action
(u) is generated on the basis of the inferences made ­under a generative model. Action is
shown ­here as part of the generative pro­cess, making changes to the world, despite
being selected from the inferences drawn ­under the model.

this point and the difference between true environmental contingencies, or
the generative pro­cess, which is inaccessible to the organism and the organism’s generative model of the world. In this par­tic­u­lar example, the generative
pro­cess is in a true state x* that is inaccessible to the organism. However, the
organism and world are reciprocally coupled, and x* generates an observation
y, which the organism senses. The organism can use this observation y and
Bayes’ rule to infer the (posterior probability of ) some explanatory variable
or hidden state in the generative model. In the figure, we refer to both x*
and x as hidden states, emphasizing that neither is observable. However, they
are subtly dif­fer­ent: the former is part of the organism’s generative model,
whereas the latter is part of the generative pro­cess and inaccessible to the
organism. Furthermore, x* and x do not necessarily live in the same space. It
might be that the hidden states in the external world take on values that lie
outside the space of explanations available to the brain. Conversely, it might
be that the brain’s explanations include variables that do not exist in the

Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/oa-monograph-pdf/2246566/book_9780262369978.pdf by guest on 24 March 2026

24

outside world. For example, the former could be 5-­dimensional and the latter
2-­dimensional, or one could be continuous and the other categorical.
The distinction between the generative model and pro­cess is impor­tant
to contextualize psychological claims about optimality of inference—to the
extent that t­hese claims are valid—­which, on a Bayesian view, is always
contingent on the organism’s resources. By resources, we mean its specific
generative model, and bounded computational and mnemonic resources.
2.4 Action as Inference
The discussion to this point is common to all Bayesian brain theories. However, we now introduce the ­simple but fundamental advance offered by
Active Inference. This starts from the same inferential perspective discussed
above but extends it to consider action as inference. This idea stems from
the concept that Bayesian inference minimizes surprise (or, equivalently,
maximizes Bayesian model evidence). So far, we have considered what happens when we compute surprise by performing inference—­and select among
models on the basis of their capacity to minimize surprise. However, surprise
does not only depend on the model. It also depends on the data. By acting
on the world to change the way in which data are generated, we can ensure
a model is fit for purpose by choosing ­those data that are least surprising
­under our model.
Equipped with a mechanism to produce actions, an organism can engage
in reciprocal exchanges with its environment; see figure 2.2. In animals,
this mechanism takes the form of a motor reflex loop. Essentially, for each
action-­perception cycle, the environment sends an observation to the
organism. The organism uses (an approximation to) Bayesian inference to
infer its most likely hidden states. It then generates an action and sends it
to the environment in an attempt to make the environment less surprising.
The environment executes the action, generates a new observation, and
sends it to the organism. Then, a new cycle starts. The sequential description ­here is written for didactic purposes; it is impor­tant to realize that
­these are not ­really discrete steps but are continuous dynamical pro­cesses.
Active Inference goes beyond the recognition that perception and action
have the same (inferential) nature. It also assumes that both perception and
action cooperate to realize a single objective—or optimize just one function—­
rather than having two distinct objectives, as more commonly assumed. In

Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/oa-monograph-pdf/2246566/book_9780262369978.pdf by guest on 24 March 2026

The Low Road to Active Inference

25

the Active Inference lit­er­a­ture, this common objective has been described in
vari­ous (informal and formal) ways, including the minimization of surprise,
entropy, uncertainty, prediction error, or (variational) ­free energy. T
­ hese terms
are related to one another but sometimes their relations are not immediately
clear, causing some confusion. Furthermore, ­these terms are used in dif­fer­
ent contexts; for example, prediction error minimization is used in biological
contexts where the objective is explaining brain signals, while variational
­free energy minimization is used in machine learning.
In the next two sections, we w
­ ill clarify that the single quantity that
Active Inference agents minimize through perception and action is variational ­free energy. However, ­under some conditions, one can reduce variational
­free energy to other notions, such as the discrepancy between the generative model and the world, or the difference between what one expects and
what one observes (i.e., a prediction error). We w
­ ill introduce variational
­free energy formally in section 2.5. For simplicity section 2.4 focuses on the
ways in which perception and action minimize the discrepancy between the
generative model and the world.
2.5 Minimizing the Discrepancy between Model and World
Having established perception and action in terms of Bayesian inference,
we now turn to the question of what the objective of inference is. In other
words, what is being optimized by inference? In cognitive science, it is
common to assume that dif­fer­ent cognitive functions like perception and
action optimize dif­fer­ent objectives. For example, we could assume perception maximizes the accuracy of reconstruction while action se­lection maximizes utility. Instead, a fundamental insight of Active Inference is that both
perception and action serve the very same objective. As a first approximation, this common objective of perception and action can be formulated as a
minimization of the discrepancy between the model and the world. Sometimes
this is operationalized in terms of prediction error.
To understand how perception and action reduce the discrepancy between
the model and the world, consider again the example of a person who expects
to see an apple (figure 2.3). She generates a top-­down visual prediction (e.g.,
about seeing something red and not jumping). This visual prediction is compared with a sensation (e.g., something jumping)—­and this comparison
results in a discrepancy.

Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/oa-monograph-pdf/2246566/book_9780262369978.pdf by guest on 24 March 2026

26

Prediction

Observation

DISCREPANCY

Perception:
change beliefs

Action:
change world

Figure 2.3
Both perception and action minimize discrepancy between model and world.

The person can resolve this discrepancy in two ways. First, she could
change her mind about what she is seeing (i.e., a frog) to fit the world,
hence resolving the discrepancy. This corresponds to perception. Second,
she could foveate the nearest apple tree and see something that looks very
much like an apple. This also resolves the initial discrepancy, but in a dif­fer­
ent way. This entails changing the world—­including her direction of gaze—­
and subsequent sensations to fit what is in her mind, not changing her
mind to fit the world. This is the other direction of fit. This is action.
While changing the direction of one’s gaze seems less compelling than
changing one’s mind in the world of apples and frogs, let us consider another
case: a person who expects his body temperature to be in a certain range
who senses a high temperature via central thermoreceptors. This is surprising
and pre­sents a significant discrepancy to resolve. As in the former example,
he has two ways to minimize this discrepancy, corresponding to perception
(changing mind) and action (changing the world), respectively. In this case,
simply changing one’s mind does not seem very adaptive, but acting to lower
the body temperature (e.g., by opening the win­dow) is.
This speaks to the fact that in Active Inference, the notion of marginal
probabilities or surprise (e.g., about body temperature) has a meaning that
goes beyond standard Bayesian treatments to absorb notions like homeostatic and allostatic set-­points. Technically, Active Inference agents come
equipped with models that assign high marginal probabilities to the states
they prefer to visit or the observations they prefer to obtain. For a fish, this
means a high marginal likelihood for being in w
­ ater. This implies that

Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/oa-monograph-pdf/2246566/book_9780262369978.pdf by guest on 24 March 2026

The Low Road to Active Inference

27

organisms implicitly expect the observations they sample to be within their
comfort zone (e.g., physiological bounds).
In sum, we have discussed how, at any point in time, we can minimize
the discrepancy between our model and our world through perception and
action. ­Whether we adjust our beliefs or our data depends on the confidence
with which we hold ­those beliefs. In our example of the apple, the belief
is held with sufficient uncertainty that this ­will be updated as opposed to
acted on. In contrast, in the temperature example, we are considerably more
confident about our core temperature ­because it underwrites our existence.
This confidence means we update our world to comply with our beliefs.
Yet, in Active Inference, perception and action act more cooperatively than
suggested by this treatment. To understand why this is the case, the next
section moves from the restricted notion of discrepancy (or prediction error) to
the more general notion of variational f­ ree energy—­which is the quantity that
Active Inference actually minimizes and which subsumes prediction error as
a special case.
2.6 Minimizing Variational F
­ ree Energy
So far, we have discussed perception and action within a Bayesian scheme
that aims to minimize surprise. Yet, exact Bayesian inference supporting perception and action is computationally intractable in most cases, ­because two
quantities—­the model evidence (P( y)) and the posterior probability (P(x | y))—­
cannot be computed for two pos­si­ble reasons. The first is that for complex
models, ­there may be many types of hidden states that all need marginalizing out, making the prob­lem computationally intractable. The second
is that the marginalization operation might require analytically intractable
integrals. Active Inference appeals to a variational approximation of Bayesian inference that is tractable.
The formalism of variational inference ­will be unpacked in chapter 4.
­Here, it suffices to say that performing variational Bayesian inference
implies substituting the two intractable quantities—­posterior probability and
(log) model evidence—­with two quantities that approximate them but can be
computed efficiently—­namely, an approximate posterior Q and a variational
­free energy F, respectively. The approximate posterior is sometimes called
a variational or recognition distribution. Negative variational ­free energy

Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/oa-monograph-pdf/2246566/book_9780262369978.pdf by guest on 24 March 2026

28

is also known as an evidence lower bound (ELBO), especially in machine
learning.
Most importantly, the prob­lem of Bayesian inference now becomes a
prob­lem of optimization: the minimization of variational f­ ree energy F. Variational f­ree energy is a quantity with roots in statistical physics that plays
a fundamental role in Active Inference. In equation 2.5, it is denoted as
F [Q , y], as it is a functional (function of a function) of the approximate
posterior Q and a function of data y:
F[Q, y] = −EQ ( x)[ln P(y, x)] − H[Q(x)]
#"#
$
!##
#"###
$ !
Energy

Entropy

= DKL[Q(x) || P(x)] − EQ ( x)[ln P(y |x)]
!##
#"###
$ !##
#"###
$
Complexity

Accuracy

(2.5)

= DKL[Q(x) || P(x | y)] − ln P(y)
!###"###$ !"
# #
$
Divergence

Evidence

Variational f­ree energy may seem prima facie an abstract concept, but
its nature and the role it plays in Active Inference become apparent when
decomposed into quantities that are more intuitive and familiar in cognitive science. Each of t­hese perspectives on variational f­ree energy offers
useful intuitions about what f­ree energy minimization means. We briefly
sketch ­these intuitions ­here, as they ­will become impor­tant when we discuss examples in the second part of the book.
The first line of equation 2.5 shows that minimizing with re­spect to Q
requires consistency with the generative model (energy) while also maintaining a high posterior entropy.5 The latter means that, in the absence
of data or precise prior beliefs (which only influence the energy term), we
should adopt maximally uncertain beliefs about the hidden states of the
world, in accord with Jaynes’s maximum entropy princi­ple ( Jaynes 1957).
Put simply, we should be uncertain (adopt a high entropy belief ) when we
have no information. The term energy inherits from statistical physics. Specifically, u
­ nder a Boltzmann distribution, the average log probability of a
system adopting some configuration is inversely proportional to the energy
associated with that configuration—­that is, the energy required to move
the system into this configuration from a baseline configuration.
The second line emphasizes the interpretation of ­free energy minimization as finding the best explanation for sensory data, which must be
the simplest (minimally complex6) explanation that is able to accurately7
account for the data (cf. Occam’s razor). The complexity-­accuracy trade-­off

Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/oa-monograph-pdf/2246566/book_9780262369978.pdf by guest on 24 March 2026

The Low Road to Active Inference

29

recurs across several domains, normally in the context of model comparison for data analy­sis. In statistics, other approximations to model evidence
are sometimes used, such as the Bayesian information criterion or Akaike
information criterion. The complexity-­
accuracy trade-­
off ­
will become
impor­tant when we describe how to use f­ ree energy for model comparison
during model-­based data analy­sis—­and in the context of structure learning
and model reduction. Inferring explanations that have minimal complexity is also impor­tant from a cognitive perspective. This is b
­ ecause one can
assume that updating what one knows (the prior) to accommodate the data
entails a cognitive cost (Ortega and Braun 2013, Zénon et al. 2019); hence,
an explanation that diverges minimally from the prior is preferable.
On this view, the complexity cost is just Bayesian surprise. In other words,
the degree to which “I change my mind” is quantified by the divergence
between the prior and the posterior. This means e­ very accurate explanation
for my sensations incurs a complexity cost, and this cost scores the degree
of Bayesian belief updating. Variational ­free energy, then, scores the difference
between accuracy and complexity.
The final line expresses the f­ree energy as a bound on negative log
evidence (see figure 2.4). As the left part of the figure illustrates, the ­free
energy is an upper bound on negative log evidence, where the bound is the
divergence between Q and the posterior probability that would have been
obtained w
­ ere it pos­si­ble to perform exact (as opposed to variational) inference. The right part of the figure shows that as the divergence decreases, the
Upper bound

F [Q,y]

Upper bound F [Q,y]
DKL[Q(x) || P(x | y)]
DKL[Q(x) || P(x | y)]

Surprise

–ln P(y)

Surprise

–ln P(y)

Figure 2.4
Variational ­free energy as an upper bound on negative log evidence.

Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/oa-monograph-pdf/2246566/book_9780262369978.pdf by guest on 24 March 2026

30

­free energy approaches the negative log evidence (surprise)—­and becomes
equal to surprise, if the approximate posterior Q matches the exact posterior P(x | y). This offers a formal motivation for perceptual inference as one
way to lower f­ree energy by optimizing our approximate posterior Q as
much as pos­si­ble.
The final line of equation 2.5 shows that perceptual inference is not the
only way to minimize f­ree energy. We could also change the log evidence
term through acting to change sensory data. This decomposition is in­ter­est­
ing from a cognitive perspective, since minimizing divergence and maximizing evidence map to the two complementary sub-­objectives of perception
and action, respectively; see figure 2.5. Note that the above expressions all
become ways of characterizing the negative log evidence if we replace Q
with P(x | y), generalizing to the case of exact inference.
In sum, Active Inference amounts to minimizing variational f­ree energy
by perception and action. This minimization permits an organism to fit its
generative model to the observations it samples. This fit is a mea­sure of both
perceptual adequacy (as expressed by the divergence term) and active control over external states—in the sense that it permits the organism to maintain itself in a suitable set of preferred states, as defined by the generative
model. Another way of phrasing this is to appeal to the divergence versus

y

Q

FREE ENERGY
F[Q, y] = DKL[Q(x) || P(x | y)] – ln P(y)
Divergence

Perception: change
beliefs to minimize
divergence

Evidence

Action: change
observations to
maximize evidence

Figure 2.5
Complementary roles of perception and action in the minimization of variational
­free energy.

Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/oa-monograph-pdf/2246566/book_9780262369978.pdf by guest on 24 March 2026

The Low Road to Active Inference

31

evidence decomposition of ­free energy. Equating the negative log evidence
with surprise, and noting that the smallest pos­si­ble divergence is zero, we
see that ­free energy is an upper bound on surprise. This means it can only
be greater than or equal to surprise. When the organism minimizes its divergence (through perception), then f­ ree energy becomes an approximation to
surprise. When an organism additionally changes the observations it gathers (by acting) to render them more similar to prior predictions, it minimizes
surprise.
Variational f­ ree energy has a retrospective aspect, as it is a function of past
and pre­sent, but not f­ uture, observations. Although it facilitates inferences
about the ­future based on past data, it does not directly facilitate prospective forms of inference based on anticipated f­uture data. This is impor­
tant in planning and decision-­making. ­Here, we infer the best actions or
action sequences (policies) on the basis of the ­future observations they are
expected to bring about. ­Doing this requires that we supplement our generative models with the notion of expected ­free energy.
2.7 Expected ­Free Energy and Planning as Inference
Expected ­free energy extends Active Inference to include a quintessentially
prospective form of cognition: planning. Planning a sequence of actions,
such as the series of moves required to escape from a maze, requires considering f­uture observations that one expects to gather. For example, the
consequences of pos­si­ble courses of action include seeing a dead end ­after
turning right or seeing the exit a
­ fter a sequence of three left turns. Each
pos­si­ble sequence of actions is termed a policy. This highlights an impor­
tant distinction made in Active Inference between an action and a policy.
The former is something that directly influences the outside world, while
the latter is a hypothesis about a way of behaving. The implication is that
Active Inference treats planning and decision-­making as a pro­cess of inferring what to do. This brings planning firmly into the realm of Bayesian
inference and means we must specify priors and likelihoods as before (section 2.1). However, in place of frogs and apples, the alternatives are behavioral policies (Is it more probable that I look ­toward the pond or the tree?).
In this section, we first briefly deal with the likelihood—­that is, the consequences of pursuing a policy—­and then turn to the prior. This is where
expected ­free energy comes in.

Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/oa-monograph-pdf/2246566/book_9780262369978.pdf by guest on 24 March 2026

32

Policy-­dependent outcomes are not immediately available (they are in
the ­future), but they can be predicted by chaining together two components of the generative model. The first is our beliefs about how hidden
states change as a function of policies. We w
­ ill get into the details of this in
chapter 4. For now, we use the notation x~ to denote a sequence or trajectory
of hidden states over time, and we condition trajectories on the policies (π )
a creature pursues. This means the dynamical part of our model is given by
P( x~ | π ). Drawing from our ­earlier frog-­apple example, the policy may be the
decision to go to a pond or to an orchard, which changes the probability of
encountering frogs versus apples.
The second component of the model is the usual likelihood distribution.
This describes which observations to expect in e­ very pos­si­ble state (e.g.,
jumping or not, conditioned on frog or apple). By combining t­hese two
components, an organism can engage its generative model vicariously to
run “what if” or counterfactual simulations of the consequences of its pos­
si­ble actions or policies—­for example, “What would happen if I go to the
pond?” Marginalizing over states, this gives us the marginal likelihood or
evidence for a policy (P(  y~ | π )), or a ­free energy approximation to this quantity. In other words, knowing how policies influence state transitions lets
us compute the likelihood of a sequence of observations ­under that policy.
As we saw in equation 2.1, we need to combine this likelihood with a prior
probability to calculate the posterior probability of pursuing a policy.
Active Inference decomposes this planning prob­lem into two successive
operations. The first is to compute a score for each policy. The second is
to form posterior beliefs about which to pursue. The former defines the
prior belief about the policies to pursue, where the best policies have high
probability and the worst policies have low probability. ­Under Active Inference, the goodness of a policy is scored by the associated negative expected
­free energy—­just as the goodness of a model fit is scored by the negative f­ree
energy of that model. The expected f­ ree energy (G) of policy is dif­fer­ent from
the variational f­ ree energy (F ), since calculating the former requires consideration of f­ uture, policy-­dependent observations. In contrast, the latter only
considers pre­sent and past observations. Calculating expected ­free energy
therefore engages the generative model to predict ­future observations that
would stem from each policy—if it w
­ ere to be executed—up to some planning horizon. Furthermore, ­because a policy unfolds over multiple time

Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/oa-monograph-pdf/2246566/book_9780262369978.pdf by guest on 24 March 2026

The Low Road to Active Inference

33

steps, the final mea­sure of expected f­ ree energy for each policy has to integrate over all f­ uture time steps of that policy.
The expected ­free energy of each policy can be converted in a quality
score (by taking its negative) and is directly available as a prior by agents
engaging in Active Inference. This is b
­ ecause—­consistent with the notion
of potential energy in physics—­expected ­free energy is expressed in the
space of log probabilities. Converting it into a belief (or probability distribution) over policies is then a m
­ atter of exponentiating (to undo the log) and
normalizing (to ensure consistency with the sum rule in box 2.1). Policies
that are associated with a lower expected f­ree energy are assigned higher
probability and become the policies that the organism expects to pursue.
Ultimately, inferring that we are pursuing a par­tic­u­lar policy has consequences for the sensory data we predict. For example, a policy that includes
flexing my elbow entails predictions about the proprioceptive input from
the biceps and triceps muscles. This provides the link between planning and
action, as the predictions associated with a plan translate into action that
resolves discrepancies with mea­sured proprioceptive data (see section 2.3).
2.8 What Is Expected ­Free Energy?
So far, we have assumed that during planning, the organism scores its policies according to their expected f­ree energy. However, we have sidestepped
what expected f­ ree energy actually is. Like variational f­ ree energy, the expected
­free energy can be decomposed in several, mathematically equivalent ways.
Each of ­these provides an alternative perspective on this quantity.
! π ) || Q( x! | π )]] − EQ ( y! | π )[ln P( y! |C)]
G(π ) = − EQ ( x,! y! | π )[ DKL[Q( x! | y,
!######
#"#######
$ !###"###$
Information gain

Pragmatic value

! + D [Q( y! |π ) || P( y! |C)]
= EQ ( x|! π )[ H[ P( y! | x)]]
####"####
$
!###"###$ !KL
Expected ambiguity

Risk (outcomes)

! + D [Q( x! |π ) || P( x! |C)]
≤ EQ ( x! |π )[ H[ P( y! | x)]]
###
#"####
$
!###"###$ !KL
Expected ambiguity

(2.6)

Risk (states)

! x! |C)] − H[Q( x! |π )]
= − EQ ( x,! y! | π )[ln P( y,
!####"####$ !#"#$
Expected energy

Entropy

! y! | π ) ! Q( x! |π )P( y! | x)
!
Q( x,
The first of ­these is perhaps the most useful, intuitively, as it expresses
the value of seeking new information (i.e., exploration) in exactly the same

Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/oa-monograph-pdf/2246566/book_9780262369978.pdf by guest on 24 March 2026

34

units (nats) as the value of seeking preferred observations (i.e., exploitation),
dissolving the classic exploit-­explore dilemma in behavioral psy­chol­ogy. By
minimizing expected f­ ree energy, the relative balance between t­ hese terms
determines ­whether be­hav­ior is predominantly explorative or exploitative.
Note that pragmatic value emerges as a prior belief about observations,
where the C-­parameter includes preferences. The (potentially unintuitive)
link between prior beliefs and preferences is unpacked in chapter 7; for
now, we note that this term can be treated as an expected utility or value,
­under the assumption that valuable outcomes are the kinds of outcomes
that characterize each agent (e.g., a body temperature of 37 °C).
The information gain term inherits from the divergence we considered in
section 2.5, which ensures that f­ree energy is an upper bound on surprise.
However, ­there is a twist: instead of minimizing the divergence, we want to
select policies that maximize the expected divergence—­hence, information
gain. This switch is due to the fact that we are now taking an average of the
log probabilities over outcomes that have yet to be observed. This is a subtle
point that can be understood in terms of outcomes switching their roles.
When evaluating the ­free energy of outcomes, the outcomes are the consequences. However, when evaluating the expected f­ ree energy, the outcomes
play the role of ­causes in the sense they are variables that are hidden in the
­future but explain decisions in the pre­sent.
The ensuing information gain penalizes observations for which t­here
is a many-­to-­one mapping from observations to states—in the sense that
one can obtain the same observations in dif­fer­ent states—as this precludes
precise belief updating. In artificial intelligence and robotics, states that
bring the same observation (e.g., two T-­junctions of a maze that look identical) are sometimes called aliased and are generally hard to deal with using
­simple methods (i.e., stimulus-­response, with no inference or memory).
The prob­lem is that we cannot know which state we occupy from current
observations alone. Active Inference avoids getting into such situations in
the first place, given their low potential for information gain.
A s­ imple example may help unpack the distinction between information
gain (or epistemic value) and pragmatic value and highlight why, in most
realistic situations, pragmatic and epistemic values need to be pursued in
tandem. Imagine a person who wants an espresso and knows that ­there are
two good cafes in the town: one that opens only from Monday to Friday and
another that opens only during the weekend. If he does not know what day

Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/oa-monograph-pdf/2246566/book_9780262369978.pdf by guest on 24 March 2026

The Low Road to Active Inference

35

of the week it is, he has to first select an action that has epistemic value and
resolves his uncertainty (i.e., an epistemic action to look at the calendar)—­
and only ­after that select an action that carries pragmatic value and brings
the reward (i.e., a pragmatic action to go to the correct cafe). This scenario
illustrates the fact that in most uncertain situations, one must first perform
epistemic actions to resolve uncertainty before confidently selecting a pragmatic action. Policy se­lection methods that fail to consider the epistemic
affordance of choices can only select policies by using random number
generators—­and ­will often miss out on their espresso. Therefore, schemes
that consider only pragmatic value are generally restricted to situations with
no epistemic uncertainty, such as in the case of a person who already knows
the day of the week and hence can head directly to the correct cafe.
The second decomposition in equation 2.6 is in terms of risk and expected
ambiguity. ­These terms are the analogues of complexity and inaccuracy: risk
is the expected complexity, and ambiguity is the expected inaccuracy. Risk,
a common notion in economics, corresponds to the fact that ­there can be
a one-­to-­many mapping between policies and their consequences—in the
sense that one can obtain several dif­fer­ent outcomes (by chance) ­under the
same policy. One example is a gambling scenario with stochastic rewards
(e.g., a one-­armed bandit, aka a slot machine), wherein one could know the
reward distribution—­say, that one w
­ ill obtain reward 10 ­percent of the time.
This is called a risky situation in economics b
­ ecause, ­after the same move
(pulling a lever), one could obtain two dif­fer­ent observations (reward or no
reward). This means one has to choose policies or plans that accommodate
uncertainty. In risk-­sensitive schemes—­like active inference—­the game is
to choose policies whose probabilistic outcomes match, in the sense of a
KL-­Divergence, one’s prior preferences. In short, minimizing complexity
cost becomes minimizing risk when both are mea­sures of departure from
prior beliefs.
Similarly, ambiguity corresponds to the expected inaccuracy due to an
ambiguous mapping between states and outcomes. A mapping is ambiguous if the distribution of outcomes anticipated is highly dispersed (or entropic) even if we know the states generating them with complete confidence.
For instance, the probability of heads or tails in a coin flip, conditioned on
­whether it is sunny or raining, ­will be maximally ambiguous as ­there is no
relationship between the weather and the 50-50 chance of heads or tails.
As such, it would not be pos­si­ble to gain information about the weather

Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/oa-monograph-pdf/2246566/book_9780262369978.pdf by guest on 24 March 2026

36

by observing tails. Note that most situations are endowed with both risk
and ambiguity—­which implies a many-­to-­one mapping between states and
outcomes and between policies and outcomes. Recall that outcomes (observations) are the only sort of variable that can be observed. Active Inference
deals automatically with ­
these situations, b
­ ecause expected ­
free energy
comprises both risk and ambiguity terms.
The third line of equation 2.6 highlights an alternative formulation of
the expected f­ ree energy by reexpressing risk as a divergence between beliefs
about states and preferences defined in terms of states. An appealing feature of this form is that it may be rearranged into an expected energy and
entropy in analogy with variational ­free energy (equation 2.5). While this
relationship is attractive, a downside of this formulation is that it assumes
the state-­space is known a priori such that prior preferences may be associated with states. In most settings, this is not a prob­lem, and the choice
between defining preferences in terms of states or outcomes has ­little
practical relevance. However, common practice is to specify preferences in
terms of outcomes—­allowing the state-­space itself to be learned while preserving extrinsic motivation.
In summary, expected f­ree energy can be decomposed in terms of risk
and ambiguity and in terms of pragmatic and epistemic values. ­These
decompositions are in­ter­est­ing as they permit a formal understanding of
the wide variety of situations that Active Inference deals with. Furthermore,
they facilitate an appreciation of how Active Inference subsumes several
decision schemes—­which may be obtained by ignoring one or more components of expected ­free energy (figure 2.6). If one removes prior preferences, the pragmatic value becomes irrelevant, and all action is motivated
by epistemic affordances—­hence such schemes can only ­handle the resolution of uncertainty. Once prior preferences are removed, the (negative)
expected ­free energy is variously known as expected Bayesian surprise (in
the context of attentional exploration) or intrinsic motivation (in the context of autonomous learning). If one removes ambiguity, the resulting
scheme corresponds to risk-­sensitive or KL control in control theory. Fi­nally,
if one removes both ambiguity and prior preferences, the only remaining
imperative is to maximize the entropy of observations (or states, if using
the formulation in the third line of equation 2.6). This may be interpreted
as uncertainty sampling (or keeping one’s options open). Active Inference
evinces the formal relations between t­ hese schemes and the (­limited) situations in which they apply.

Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/oa-monograph-pdf/2246566/book_9780262369978.pdf by guest on 24 March 2026

The Low Road to Active Inference

37

EXPECTED FREE ENERGY
G() = – Q(ỹ | ) [ln P(ỹ | C )] – DKL [Q(ỹ | x) Q (x |) || Q (ỹ | ) Q (x | )]
1

2

3

4

5

DKL [Q(ỹ | x) Q (x | ) || Q (ỹ | ) Q (x | )]
=

Q(ỹ | )

[DKL [Q(x | ỹ, ) || Q (x | )]]
BAYESIAN SURPRISE

OPTIMAL BAYESIAN DESIGN
INTRINSIC MOTIVATION
INFOMAX PRINCIPLE

2

3

4

1

5

3

4

5

DKL [Q( ỹ | ) || P ( ỹ | C )]
RISK-SENSITIVE POLICIES
KL CONTROL

1

Q(ỹ | ) [ln P ( ỹ | C )]
BAYESIAN DECISION THEORY
EXPECTED UTILITY THEORY

Figure 2.6
Vari­ous schemes that can be derived by removing terms from the ­free energy equation.
The upper panel shows the terms contributing to the expected f­ ree energy. The lower
panels show the schemes that result from removing prior preferences (1), ambiguity
(2), or every­thing except for the prior preferences. Each of ­these quantities appears in
several dif­fer­ent fields ­under a variety of names, but all can be seen as components of
the same expected ­free energy.

Although we have carefully decomposed expected ­free energy in a way
that dif­fer­ent ­people might read this functional, t­ here is no right or wrong
way of carving it up. We w
­ ill see in the second half of this book why autonomous systems of a certain kind must, in virtue of existing, choose actions
that look as if they are minimizing expected f­ree energy. This perspective
means ­there is no privileged role for epistemic (explorative) versus pragmatic
(exploitative) imperatives—or for risk versus ambiguity. T
­ hese (possibly
false) dichotomies are just two sides of the same existential coin.
2.9 At the End of the Low Road
Having introduced the two distinct notions of variational f­ree energy and
expected f­ ree energy, we are now in a position to consider what they achieve
together. This represents an endpoint to the low road into Active Inference,
starting from the notion of unconscious inference, via the Bayesian brain,
the duality of perception and action, and fi­nally planning as inference.

Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/oa-monograph-pdf/2246566/book_9780262369978.pdf by guest on 24 March 2026

38

Variational ­free energy is at the core of Active Inference. It mea­sures the fit
between the internal generative model and (current and past) observations.
By minimizing variational ­free energy, creatures maximize their model evidence. This ensures that the generative model becomes a good model of the
environment and that the environment complies with the model.
Expected ­free energy is a way to score alternative policies for planning.
This is fundamentally prospective—it considers pos­si­ble ­future observations—­
and counterfactual—­the pos­si­ble ­future observations are conditioned on the
policies one could pursue. Expected ­free energy mea­sures the plausibility of
action policies relative to preferred (­future) states and observations. By scoring policies in terms of their negative expected f­ ree energy, creatures engaging in Active Inference effectively believe that they pursue the course of
action for which this quantity is lowest. In psychological terms, this implies
that a creature’s belief about policies directly corresponds to its intention—­
which it fulfills by acting.
From a conceptual perspective, we can associate minimization of variational ­free energy and expected f­ree energy with two inferential loops,
one nested within the other. Variational ­free energy minimization is the
key (outside) loop of Active Inference, which is sufficient to optimize perception and beliefs about policies. An Active Inference agent can also be
endowed with a generative model of the consequences of its action that
entails an evaluation of expected ­free energy (the inside loop). This ability
to plan into the ­future supports prospective forms of action se­lection by
furnishing probability values for policies (Friston, Samothrakis, and Montague 2012; Pezzulo 2012).
2.10 Summary
Active Inference is a theory of how living artifacts underwrite their existence by minimizing surprise—or a tractable proxy to surprise, variational ­free
energy—­via perception and action. In this chapter, we have sought to motivate
this idea starting from a Bayesian treatment of perception as inference and
extending this to the domain of action. Bayesian inference rests on a generative model of how sensory observations are generated, which encodes (probabilistically) the organism’s implicit knowledge of the world—­formalized as
prior beliefs and the expected outcomes ­under alternative states and policies.

Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/oa-monograph-pdf/2246566/book_9780262369978.pdf by guest on 24 March 2026

The Low Road to Active Inference

39

The specific take of Active Inference forces us to revisit the usual semantics of a prior in Bayesian inference. Expected states are preferred and
include the organism’s conditions for survival (e.g., niche-­specific goal states),
whereas their opposite—­surprising states—­are dis-­preferred. In this way,
by fulfilling their expectations, Active Inference agents ensure their own
survival. Given the impor­tant links between the notion of priors and the
conditions that undergird an organism’s existence, we can also say that in
Active Inference, the identity of an agent is isomorphic with its priors. This
terminology ­will become more familiar l­ater in the book.
Note that in this view, surprise (or sometimes surprisal ) is a formal construct of information theory and not necessarily equivalent to a (folk) psychological construct. Roughly, the more the organism’s state differs from
the prior (which encodes the preferred states), the more it is surprising—­
hence Active Inference amounts to the idea that an organism (or its brain)
has to actively minimize its surprise to stay alive. ­Under certain conditions,
surprise minimization can be construed as the reduction of the discrepancy
between the model and the world. More generally, the quantity that is actually minimized in Active Inference is variational f­ree energy. Variational ­free
energy is an (upper-­bound) approximation to surprise and can be minimized efficiently using chemical or neuronal message passing and information that is available to the organism’s generative model.
Importantly, both perception and action minimize variational f­ ree energy
in complementary ways: by refining their (posterior belief ) estimate and by
performing actions that selectively sample what is expected. Furthermore,
Active Inference also minimizes expected f­ree energy by following policies
associated with minimal ambiguity and risk. Expected ­free energy then
extends Active Inference to prospective and counterfactual forms of inference. This completes our journey along the low road to Active Inference. In
chapter 3, we ­will travel the high road, which reaches the same conclusion
on the basis of first princi­ples and self-­organization.

Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/oa-monograph-pdf/2246566/book_9780262369978.pdf by guest on 24 March 2026

Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/oa-monograph-pdf/2246566/book_9780262369978.pdf by guest on 24 March 2026

3

The High Road to Active Inference

Survival machines that can simulate the ­future are one jump ahead of survival
machines who can only learn on the basis of overt trial and error. The trou­ble
with overt trial is that it takes time and energy. The trou­ble with overt error is that
it is often fatal. Simulation is both safer and faster.
—­Richard Dawkins

3.1 Introduction
In chapter 2, we motivated the introduction of f­ree energy as a means of
performing approximate Bayesian inference (i.e., the low road to Active
Inference). ­Here, we introduce f­ree energy from another perspective, that
of the high road, which inverts that reasoning: it starts from first princi­ples
in statistical physics and the central imperative that organisms must maintain their existence—­that is, avoid surprising states—­and then introduces
the minimization of ­free energy as a computationally tractable solution to
this prob­lem. The chapter discloses the formal equivalence between the
minimization of variational ­free energy and the maximization of model
evidence (or self-­evidencing) in approximate Bayesian inference, revealing
a connection between ­free energy and Bayesian perspectives on adaptive
systems. Fi­nally, it discusses how Active Inference provides a novel first
princi­ple perspective to understand (optimal) be­hav­ior.
Active Inference is a theory of how living organisms maintain their existence by minimizing surprise—or a tractable proxy to surprise, variational
­free energy—­via perception and action. By starting from first princi­ples, it
advances a novel belief-­based scheme to understand be­hav­ior and cognition, which has numerous empirical implications.

Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/oa-monograph-pdf/2246566/book_9780262369978.pdf by guest on 24 March 2026

42

The high road to Active Inference starts from the premise that, to survive, any living organism has to maintain itself in a suitable set of preferred
states, while avoiding other, dis-­preferred states of the environment. ­These
preferred states are first and foremost defined by niche-­specific evolutionary adaptations. However, as we w
­ ill see ­later, in advanced organisms ­these
can also extend to learned cognitive goals. For example, to survive, a fish
has to stay in a comfort zone that corresponds to a small subset of all the
pos­si­ble states of the universe: it has to stay in w
­ ater. Similarly, a h
­ uman
has to ensure that their internal states (e.g., physiological variables like
body temperature and heart rate) always remain within acceptable ranges—­
other­wise they w
­ ill die (or more precisely ­will become something ­else, such
as a corpse). This acceptable range or comfort zone stipulatively defines the
characteristic states something has to be in to be that t­ hing.
Living organisms resolve this fundamental biological prob­lem by exerting active control over their states (e.g., of body temperature) at many levels,
which range from automatic regulatory mechanisms such as sweating (physiology) to cognitive mechanisms such as buying and consuming a drink (psy­
chol­ogy) to cultural practices such as distributing air conditioning systems
(social sciences).
From a more formal perspective, Active Inference casts the biological
prob­lem of—or explanation for—­survival as surprise minimization. This
formulation rests on a technical definition of surprising states from information theory—­essentially, surprising states index t­hose outside the comfort
zone of living organisms. It then proposes ­free energy minimization as a
practical and biologically grounded way for organisms or adaptive systems
to minimize the surprise of sensory encounters.
3.2 Markov Blankets
An impor­tant precondition for any adaptive system is that it must enjoy
some separation and autonomy from the environment—­without which it
would simply dissipate, dissolve, and thereby succumb to environmental
dynamics. In the absence of this separation, ­there would be no surprise to
minimize; t­here must be something to be surprised and something to be
surprised about. In other words, t­here are at least two t­hings—­system and
environment—­and t­hese can be disambiguated from one another. A formal
way to express a separation between a system and the rest of the environment is the statistical construct of a Markov blanket (Pearl 1988); see box 3.1.

Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/oa-monograph-pdf/2246566/book_9780262369978.pdf by guest on 24 March 2026

The High Road to Active Inference

43

Box 3.1
Markov blankets
A Markov blanket is an impor­tant recurring concept in this book (Friston
2019a, Kirchhoff et al. 2018, Palacios et al. 2020). Technically, a blanket (b) is
defined as follows:

µ ⊥ x |b ⇔ p( µ ,x |b) = p( µ |b)p(x |b)
This says (in two dif­fer­ent but equivalent ways) that a variable μ is conditionally in­de­pen­dent of a variable x if b is known. In other words, if we know
b, knowing x would give us no additional information about μ. A common