Markov blanket is drawn around a single neuron but not when the blanket
is drawn around the ner­vous system.
The above is particularly relevant when dealing with embodied or
extended perspectives on cognition (Clark and Chal­mers 1998; Barsalou
2008; Pezzulo, Lw et al. 2011). For example, if we draw the blanket around
the ner­vous system, the rest of the body becomes an external state, about
which we must make inferences from interoceptive sensory states (Allen
et al. 2019). Alternatively, we could draw our blanket around the entire
organism. This would make it look as if organs other than the brain ­were
making inferences about their environment. For example, depression of
the skin in response to an external pressure could be framed as an inference
about the source of the external pressure. The extended cognition perspective takes this further and says that objects external to the body may be
incorporated into the Markov blanket (e.g., the use of a calculator to assist
in inference implies that the calculator is part of the internal state-­space
of the inferring system). Fi­nally, we could have multiple Markov blankets,
nested within one another (e.g., brains, organisms, communities).
In sum, defining the Markov blanket ensures we know what is being inferred
(external states) and what is ­doing the inferring. Indeed, minimization of ­free

Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/oa-monograph-pdf/2246566/book_9780262369978.pdf by guest on 24 March 2026

110

energy with re­spect to a generative model only involves the internal and
active states of a system: t­hese only see the sensory states, so they can only
infer the external state of the world vicariously.
6.4 What Is the Most Appropriate Form for the Generative Model?
Once we have de­cided on the internal states of a system and the states that
mediate their interaction with the world outside, we need to specify the
generative model that explains how external states influence sensory states.
As discussed in previous chapters, Active Inference can operate on dif­
fer­ent kinds of generative models. Therefore, we need to specify the most
appropriate form of the generative model for the prob­lem at hand. This
implies making three main design choices. The first is a choice between
models that include continuous or discrete variables (or both). The second is a choice between shallow models, in which inference operates on a
single timescale (i.e., all variables evolve at the same timescale), and hierarchical or deep models, in which inference operates on multiple timescales (i.e., dif­fer­ent variables evolve at dif­fer­ent timescales). The third is
a choice between models that only consider pre­sent observations versus
models having some temporal depth, which consider the consequences of
actions or plans.
6.4.1 Discrete or Continuous Variables (or Both)?
The first design choice is to consider w
­ hether generative models that use discrete or continuous variables are more appropriate. The former include object
identities, alternative action plans, and discretized repre­sen­ta­tions of continuous variables. ­These are modeled through expressing the ­probability—at each
time step—of one variable transitioning into another type. The latter include
­things like position, velocity, muscle length, and luminance and require a
generative model expressed in terms of rates of change.
Computationally, the distinction between the two may not be clear-­cut
­because a continuous variable may be discretized, and a discrete variable
may be expressed through continuous variables. However, this distinction
is impor­tant conceptually, as it underlies specific hypotheses about the
time course (discrete or continuous) of the cognitive pro­cesses of interest.1
In most current implementations of Active Inference, high-­level decision
pro­cesses, such as the choice between alternative courses of actions, are

Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/oa-monograph-pdf/2246566/book_9780262369978.pdf by guest on 24 March 2026

A ­Recipe for Designing Active Inference Models

111

modeled using discrete variables, whereas more fine-­grained perception and
action dynamics are implemented using continuous variables; we w
­ ill provide examples of both in chapters 7 and 8, respectively.
Furthermore, the choice between discrete and continuous variables is
relevant for neurobiology. While each style of modeling appeals to ­free
energy minimization, the message passing t­ hese imply take dif­fer­ent forms.
To the extent that one considers message passing relevant for a pro­cess theory (see chapter 5), this implies that the neural dynamics that realize this
minimization are dif­fer­ent u
­ nder each sort of model. Continuous schemes
underwrite predictive coding—­a theory of neural pro­cessing that relies on
top-­down predictions corrected by bottom-up prediction errors. However,
the analogous pro­cess theories for discrete inferences involve messages of a
dif­fer­ent form. Fi­nally, the two types of model may be combined such that
discrete states are associated with continuous variables. This means we can
specify a generative model wherein a discrete state (e.g., object identity)
generates some pattern of continuous variables (e.g., luminance). We ­will
discuss an example of a hybrid or mixed generative model that includes
both discrete and continuous variables in chapter 8.
6.4.2 Timescales of Inference: Shallow versus Hierarchical Models
The second design choice concerns the timescales of Active Inference.
One can select ­either (shallow) generative models, in which all the variables evolve at the same timescale, or (hierarchical or deep) models, which
include variables that evolve at dif­fer­ent timescales: slower for higher levels
and faster for lower levels.
While many s­ imple cognitive models only require shallow models, t­ hese
are not sufficient when ­there is a clear separation of timescales between dif­
fer­ent aspects of a cognitive pro­cess of interest. One example of this is in language pro­cessing, in which short sequences of phonemes are contextualized
by the word that is spoken and short sequences of words are contextualized
by the current sentence. Crucially, the duration of the word transcends that
of any one phoneme in the sequence and the duration of the sentence transcends that of any one word in the sequence. Hence, to model language pro­
cessing, one can consider a hierarchical model in which sentences, words,
and phonemes appear at dif­fer­ent (higher to lower) hierarchical levels and
evolve over (slower to faster) timescales that are approximately in­de­pen­
dent of one another. This is only an approximate separation, as levels must

Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/oa-monograph-pdf/2246566/book_9780262369978.pdf by guest on 24 March 2026

112

influence each other (e.g., the sentence influences the next words in the
sequence; the word influences the next phonemes in the sequence).
However, this does not mean we need to attempt to model the entire
brain to develop meaningful simulations of a single level. For example, if
we wanted to focus on word pro­cessing, we could address some aspects
without having to deal with phoneme pro­cessing. This means we can treat
input from parts of the brain drawing inferences about phonemes as providing observations from the perspective of word-­processing areas. Phrasing this in terms of a Markov blanket, this typically means we treat the
inferences performed by lower levels of a model as part of the sensory states
of the blanket. This means we can summarize the inferences performed at
the timescale of interest without having to specify the details of lower-­level
(faster) inferential processes—­
and this hierarchical factorization entails
­great computational benefits.
Another example is in the domain of intentional action se­lection, where
the same goal (enter your apartment) can be active for an extended period
of time and contextualizes a series of subgoals and actions (find keys, open
door, enter) that are resolved at a much faster timescale. This separation of
timescales, ­whether in the continuous or discrete domain, demands a hierarchical (deep) generative model. In neuroscience, one can assume that cortical hierarchies embed this sort of temporal separation of timescales, with
slowly evolving states at higher levels and rapidly evolving states at lower
levels, and that this recapitulates environmental dynamics, which also
evolve at multiple timescales (e.g., during perceptual tasks like speech recognition or reading). In psy­chol­ogy, this sort of model is useful in reproducing
hierarchical goal pro­cessing (Pezzulo, Rigoli, and Friston 2018) and working
memory tasks (Parr and Friston 2017c) of the sort that rely on delay-­period
activity (Funahashi et al. 1989).
6.4.3 Temporal Depth of Inference and Planning
The third design choice concerns the temporal depth of inference. It is impor­
tant to draw a distinction between two kinds of generative model: the first
have temporal depth and represent explic­itly the consequences of actions or
action sequences (policies or plans), whereas the second lack temporal depth
and only consider pre­sent but not ­future observations. ­These two kinds of
model are exemplified in figure 4.3: the dynamic POMDP at the top and the
continuous-­time model at the bottom.2 The key difference between ­these

Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/oa-monograph-pdf/2246566/book_9780262369978.pdf by guest on 24 March 2026

A ­Recipe for Designing Active Inference Models

113

two models is not that they use discrete or continuous variables, respectively, but that only the former (temporally deep) model endows creatures
with the ability to plan ahead and select among pos­si­ble ­futures.
Imagine a rodent who plans a route to a known food location in a maze.
­Doing this benefits from a temporally deep model, loosely equivalent to a spatial or cognitive map (Tolman 1948), which encodes contingencies between
pre­sent and ­future locations conditioned on actions (e.g., the ­future location
­after turning right or left). The animal can use the temporally deep model to
counterfactually consider multiple courses of action (e.g., series of right and
left turns) and select the one expected to reach the food location.
Why is a temporally deep model required for planning? In Active Inference, planning is realized by calculating the expected f­ ree energy associated
with dif­fer­ent actions or policies and then selecting the policy that is associated with the lowest expected f­ree energy. Expected f­ree energy is not just
a function of pre­sent observations (like variational ­free energy) but also a
functional of ­future observations. The latter cannot be observed (by definition) but only predicted using a temporally deep model, which describes
the ways in which actions produce f­ uture observations.
When designing an Active Inference agent it is useful to consider w
­ hether
it should have planning and future-­oriented capacities—­and, in this case, to
select a temporally deep model. Furthermore, it is useful to consider planning depth—­that is, how far in the ­future the planning pro­cess can look.
Fi­nally, one can design generative models that are both hierarchical and
temporally deep, wherein planning proceeds at multiple timescales—­faster
­ hether to model
at lower levels, and slower at higher levels.3 The decision w
alternative ­futures, contingent on policy se­lection, is largely tied up with the
choice between discrete and continuous models b
­ ecause the idea of selecting
between alternative f­utures, defined by sequences of actions, is more simply
articulated using discrete-­time models.
6.5 How to Set Up the Generative Model?
When we have specified our system of interest and identified the relevant
forms of the generative model (e.g., continuous or discrete repre­sen­ta­tion,
shallow versus hierarchical structure), our next challenges are to specify the
specific variables to include in the generative model and decide which of
­these variables remain fixed or change as an effect of learning.

Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/oa-monograph-pdf/2246566/book_9780262369978.pdf by guest on 24 March 2026

114

6.5.1 Setting Up the Variables of the Generative Model
The variables of generative models can be e­ ither predefined or learned from
data. For illustrative purposes, most models that we discuss in this book
use predefined variables. When designing t­hese models, in practice, the
main challenge is deciding which hidden states, observations, and actions
are most appropriate for the prob­lem at hand. For example, the perceptual
model able to distinguish frogs from apples in chapter 2 only included two
hidden states (frogs, apples) and two observations (jumps, does not jump).
A more sophisticated model could include additional observations (e.g.,
red, green) as well as actions such as touching, which produce differential
sensory effects (jump or no jump) in the presence of a frog or an apple.
Figure 6.2 schematically illustrates a generative model for the concept
of a jumping frog. The concept is cast as a hierarchical model, where
Interoceptive sensations
(e.g., high heart rate)
Auditory sensations
(e.g., croaking)
Interoceptive percept
Auditory percept
Tactile percept
Tactile sensation
(e.g., wrinkliness)

Jumping frog
Visual percept
Action
(e.g., touching)

Visual sensations
(e.g., green, jumping)

Figure 6.2
(Hierarchical) generative model for the concept of a jumping frog uses a simplified notation compared to chapter 4: nodes within the dotted circle correspond to
hidden states, whereas nodes at the periphery correspond to sensory observations.
Beliefs about hidden states, following inversion of the model, correspond to percepts
that may be tied to a sensory modality (e.g., visual percept) or may be amodal (e.g.,
the jumping frog). Action contingencies are represented as dashed lines. Horizontal dependencies between hidden states in dif­fer­ent modalities, as well as temporal
dependencies between hidden states (as we saw in the dynamical generative models
of chapter 4), are ignored for the sake of simplicity.

Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/oa-monograph-pdf/2246566/book_9780262369978.pdf by guest on 24 March 2026

A ­Recipe for Designing Active Inference Models

115

Box 6.1
Va­ri­e­ties of sensory modalities: Exteroceptive, proprioceptive, and interoceptive
In Active Inference, a conceptual distinction is often made between three
kinds of sensory modalities: exteroceptive (e.g., vision and audition), proprioceptive (e.g., the sense of joint and limb positions), and interoceptive (e.g.,
the sense of the internal organs of the body, such as heart and stomach). In
multimodal generative models, one can often factorize parts of the model that
relate to dif­fer­ent modalities; this permits representing that (for example) saccadic movements have visual but not auditory consequences.
Importantly, the same princi­ples of Active Inference operate across all the
modalities. For example, in the same way visual pro­cessing can be described
as the inference about (hidden variables about) a perceptual scene, interoceptive pro­cessing can be described as the inference about (hidden variables
that report) the internal state of the body. Furthermore, motor actions that
change the perceptual scene and internally directed actions that change the
interoceptive state can be described in a similar way. The former engages spinal reflexes that fulfill proprioceptive predictions, whereas the latter engages
autonomic reflexes that fulfill interoceptive predictions. Such interoceptive
pro­cessing supports allostasis and adaptive regulation, and its dysfunctions
can have psychopathological consequences (Pezzulo 2013, Seth 2013, Pezzulo
and Levin 2015, Seth and Friston 2016, Allen et al. 2019).

a single (multimodal or supramodal) hidden state at the center of the
figure unfolds in a cascade of (unimodal) hidden states corresponding
to percepts in dif­fer­ent modalities (exteroceptive, proprioceptive, and
interoceptive; see box 6.1) and ultimately causing sensations in the same
modalities. This arrangement corresponds to casting the jumping frog concept as the common cause of multiple sensory consequences (e.g., something
green and jumping in the visual domain; a croaking sound in the auditory domain), some of which can be action-­contingent (e.g., the sight of
something jumping may increase on touching it). The inversion of the
generative model corresponds to a perceptual inference (e.g., the presence
of a jumping frog) from its observed sensory consequences (e.g., the sight
of something green and jumpy), and it integrates information across multiple modalities.
Once ­these variables of interest have been established, the next exercise is to write down the full generative model. One example is the ­simple
generative model for frogs and apples in figure 2.1, which is fully specified
by prior beliefs about hidden states and a (likelihood) mapping between

Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/oa-monograph-pdf/2246566/book_9780262369978.pdf by guest on 24 March 2026

116

hidden states and observations and whose numerical values can be ­either
specified by hand or learned from data (see 6.5.2).
Beyond this ­simple example, the ele­ments that need to be specified are
fully determined by the form of the selected generative model. For example, the model for discrete-­time POMDP shown in figure 4.3 (top) requires
specifying the A, B, C, D, and E matrices; continuous schemes use analogous
(although less alphabetical) ele­ments, which w
­ ill be dealt with in chapter 8.
But even in ­these more complex cases, the exercise is not so dissimilar from
above: namely, specifying prior beliefs about the variables of interest (e.g., in
discrete-­time implementations, about hidden states at the first time step in
the D-­vector and about observations in the C-­matrix) and their probabilistic
mappings (e.g., likelihood mapping between hidden states and observations
in the A-­matrix). However, in some cases, it is useful to think about factorizations of the state-­space of the generative model, which avoids considering
­every pos­si­ble combination of variables if some are unnecessary. In chapter 7,
we ­will discuss a biologically plausible example of factorization that occurs
in perceptual pro­cessing between “what” and “where” streams (Ungerleider
and Haxby 1994)—­namely, between variables that represent object identities
and locations, respectively, which can be treated in­de­pen­dently in the model
(hence simplifying it) as they are often invariant to one another.
Deciding which variables are of interest and the ways they are related or
factorized in the model is often the most challenging—­but also the most
creative—­part of model design. It is an exercise of translating our cognitive hypotheses into a mathematical form that supports Active Inference.
How should we select the “right” variables? Ultimately, this is a question
of specifying plausible alternatives and picking ­those that have the lowest
­free energy (cf. Bayesian model comparison). However, a practically useful perspective for most studies is that the generative model should be as
similar as pos­si­ble to how we believe data are generated. When appealing
to Active Inference in the setting of cognitive psy­chol­ogy, this often means
thinking about how experimental psychologists would go about generating
the stimuli they pre­sent to their experimental participants. On formalizing
­these pro­cesses in terms of the requisite probability distributions, we arrive
at a generative model whose f­ree energy minimizing dynamics naturally
lead to per­for­mance of the task in question.
­Here, we can draw an analogy with most Bayesian (or ideal observer)
models of perception, in which the models are designed to mimic (to a

Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/oa-monograph-pdf/2246566/book_9780262369978.pdf by guest on 24 March 2026

A ­Recipe for Designing Active Inference Models

117

Box 6.2
Priors and empirical be­hav­ior
Another perspective on the issue of selecting priors draws from a set of results
known as the complete class theorems (Wald 1947, Daunizeau et al. 2010), which
state that any statistical decision procedure (i.e., be­hav­ior) may be framed as
Bayes optimal u
­ nder the right set of prior beliefs. This means that if we are
interested in explaining empirical be­hav­ior, our challenge is to identify the
generative model (comprising prior beliefs) that would reproduce that be­hav­
ior as simply as pos­si­ble. In short, priors are a statement of a hypothesis about
the system in question. If other prior beliefs would be plausible, this offers an
opportunity to put this to empirical data through Bayesian model comparison.
This also has implications for computational phenotyping in clinical populations. That ­there ­will always be a set of prior beliefs that render be­hav­ior Bayes
optimal implies the key question—in understanding the computational deficits that give rise to psychiatric or neurological syndromes—is what ­these priors
are. This idea is slightly counterintuitive at first. However, the complete class
theorem means that asking w
­ hether a be­hav­ior is (Bayes) optimal is meaningless. The impor­tant question is, What are the prior beliefs that would make this
optimal? In chapter 9, we w
­ ill see how an appeal to f­ree energy minimization
based on our own beliefs as scientists offers a way to answer this question.

large extent) the structure of the task at hand, as in the example of recognizing a frog or an apple (chapter 2). This idea is sometimes equated
with the good regulator theorem (Conant and Ashby 1970), which says that
to regulate an environment effectively, a creature (­whether biological or
synthetic) must be a good model of that system. From the perspective of
eco-­niche construction, this is sometimes phrased in terms of the (statistical) fitness (Bruineberg et al. 2018) of a creature’s model to its environment
(and vice versa). However, this does not mean that an agent’s generative
model has to be identical to the generative pro­cess that actually generates
data. For most practical applications, it can be simplified or dif­fer­ent. We
­will return to this point ­later in this chapter (6.6).
6.5.2 Which Parts of the Generative Model Are Fixed,
and What Is Learned?
Another design choice is deciding which parts of the generative model are fixed
and which ones are updated over time as an effect of learning. In princi­ple,
Active Inference allows e­ very part of the model—­and even its structure—to be

Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/oa-monograph-pdf/2246566/book_9780262369978.pdf by guest on 24 March 2026

118

updated (or learned) over time. This renders learning a design choice rather
than something mandatory. In keeping with this, we ­will cover examples of
Active Inference models that are completely designed by hand and examples
in which some parts of the model (e.g., transition probabilities) remain fixed
while o
­ thers (e.g., likelihoods) are updated over time.
In Active Inference, learning is cast as an aspect of inference, as a f­ree
energy minimizing pro­cess. So far, we have described inference in terms of
an update of beliefs about states of the generative model. In much the same
way, we can describe learning as an update of beliefs about par­ameters of the
generative model. For this, the generative model has to be endowed with
prior beliefs about par­ameters of the distributions to be learned, where the
specific par­ameters depend on probability distribution associated with each
variable (e.g., mean and variance for a Gaussian distribution). ­These prior
values are updated to form posterior beliefs whenever new data are encountered. As we w
­ ill discuss in chapter 7, the algorithmic form of this update is
the same as the update of state variables.
The fact that both inference and learning use the same kind of Bayesian
belief updates may seem confusing during model design—­partly ­because
deciding what should be modeled as a state or a pa­ram­et­er is not always
straightforward. However, when it comes to cognitive models, ­there is a
clear difference between inference and learning. Inference describes (fast)
changes of our beliefs about model states—­for example, how we update our
belief that ­there is an apple in front of us ­after observing something red.
Learning describes (slow) changes of our beliefs about model par­ameters—­
for example, how we update our likelihood distribution to increase the value
of the apples-­red mapping a
­ fter observing several occurrences of red apples.
Beliefs about par­ameters typically vary much more slowly than t­ hose about
states, and they may only be updated ­after states have been inferred. From
a neurobiological perspective, it is appealing to map inference to neuronal dynamics and learning to synaptic plasticity. Furthermore, as we ­will
discuss in chapter 7, holding probabilistic beliefs about model par­ameters
induces novelty-­seeking be­hav­iors so that creatures may select the best data
to learn the causal structure of their worlds. This suggests that endowing
Active Inference models with the ability to learn their par­ameters (or even
their structure; see chapter 7) is an effective way to study the behavioral
dynamics of active learning and curiosity-­based exploration.
Before concluding this section, it is worth noting that in this book we
exemplify rather ­simple generative models that are defined using tabular

Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/oa-monograph-pdf/2246566/book_9780262369978.pdf by guest on 24 March 2026

A ­Recipe for Designing Active Inference Models

119

methods (e.g., with explicit matrices for priors and likelihoods) and that
operate in small state-­
spaces. In comparison, much more sophisticated
kinds of generative models—­and associated learning schemes—­are being
developed in fields like machine learning, deep learning, and robotics, such
as, for example, variational autoencoders (Kingma and Welling 2014), generative adversarial networks (Goodfellow et al. 2014), recursive cortical networks (George et al. 2017), and world models (Ha and Schmidhuber 2018).
In princi­ple, one could borrow any of ­these methods (and many ­others) to
implement one or more parts of Active Inference models (e.g., likelihood
or transition models). By leveraging the most up-­to-­date machine learning
methods, it would be pos­si­ble to scale up Active Inference to increasingly
more challenging domains and applications; see, for example, Ueltzhöffer
(2018) and Millidge (2019).
However, t­here are some impor­tant points to consider when designing
Active Inference models that use sophisticated machine learning models,
especially if one is interested in cognitive and neurobiological implications.
One appeal of Active Inference is that it offers an integrative perspective on
cognitive functions by assuming that (for example) perceptual inference,
action planning, and learning all stem from the same ­free energy minimization pro­cess. This integrative power would be lost if (for example) one juxta­­
posed generative models that operate or learn in­de­pen­dently from one
another. Furthermore, the aforementioned machine learning methods correspond to pro­cess models that are distinct from Active Inference and have
dif­fer­ent cognitive and neurobiological interpretations. Fi­nally, when using
machine learning methods, some of the design choices discussed h
­ ere (e.g.,
about the choice of model variables) may be skipped, as they are emergent
properties of learning; however, they may be replaced by dif­fer­ent design
choices, about (for example) number of layers, par­ameters, and learning
rates of a deep neural net. T
­ hese design choices potentially have relevant
cognitive and neurobiological implications, which are beyond the scope of
what we address ­here.
6.6 Setting Up the Generative Pro­cess
In Active Inference, the generative pro­cess describes the dynamics of the world
external to the Active Inference agent, which corresponds to the pro­cess
that determines the agent’s observations (see figure 6.1). It may seem bizarre
to have postponed defining the generative pro­cess u
­ ntil ­after describing the

Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/oa-monograph-pdf/2246566/book_9780262369978.pdf by guest on 24 March 2026

120

agent’s generative model. ­After all, a modeler would have some task (and
generative pro­cess) in mind from the beginning, so it would make perfect
sense to revert this order and design the generative pro­cess before the generative model, especially in applications where the generative model has to
be learned during situated interactions, as in gamelike or robotic settings
(Ueltzhöffer 2018, Millidge 2019, Sancaktar et al. 2020).
The reason we postponed the design of the generative pro­cess is that, in
many practical applications discussed in this book, we simply assume that
the dynamics of the generative pro­cess are the same as, or very similar to,
the generative model. In other words, we generally assume that the agent’s
generative model closely mimics the pro­cess that generates its observations.
This is not the same as saying that the agent has perfect knowledge of the
environment. Indeed, even if the agent knows the pro­cess that generates its
observations, it may be uncertain about (for example) its initial state in the
pro­cess, as was the case in the apple versus frog example. In the language of
discrete-­time Active Inference, one could design a model in which both the
generative model and the generative pro­cess are characterized by the same
A-­matrix but in which the agent’s belief about its initial state (D-­vector),
which is part of its generative model, is dif­fer­ent from—or even inconsistent with—­the true initial state of the generative pro­cess. One subtle ­thing
to notice is that even if both the generative model and the generative pro­
cess are characterized by the same A-­ and B-­matrices, their semantics are
dif­fer­ent. The A-­matrix of the generative pro­cess is an objective property of
the environment (sometimes called a mea­sure­ment distribution in Bayesian
models), whereas the A-­matrix of the generative model encodes an agent’s
subjective belief (called a likelihood function in Bayesian models).
Of course, except in the simplest cases, it is not mandatory that the generative model and generative pro­cess are the same. In practical implementations of Active Inference, one can always specify the generative pro­cess
separately from the generative model, e­ ither using equations that differ
from ­those of the generative model or using other methods, such as game
simulators, which take actions as inputs and provide observations as outputs (Cullen et al. 2018), thereby following the usual action-­perception
loop implied by the Markov blanket of figure 6.1.
­There are some philosophical implications of designing generative models that are similar or dissimilar from the generative pro­cess (Hohwy 2013;
Clark 2015; Pezzulo, Donnarumma et al. 2017; Nave et al. 2020, Tschantz

Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/oa-monograph-pdf/2246566/book_9780262369978.pdf by guest on 24 March 2026

A ­Recipe for Designing Active Inference Models

121

et al. 2020). As discussed above, the good regulator theorem (Conant and
Ashby 1970) says that an effective adaptive creature must have or be a good
model of the system it regulates. However, this can be achieved in vari­ous
ways. First, as discussed so far, the creature’s generative model can mimic
(at least to a ­great extent) the generative pro­cess. Models developed in this
way may be called explicit or environmental models, given the resemblance
between their internal states and the environment’s external states. Second,
the creature’s generative model can be much more parsimonious than (and
even significantly dif­fer­ent from) the generative pro­cess, to the extent that
it correctly manages ­those aspects of the environment that are useful to act
adaptively in it and achieve the creature’s goals. Models developed in this
way may be called sensorimotor or action oriented, as they mostly encode
action-­observation (or sensorimotor) contingencies and their primary role
is supporting goal-­directed actions as opposed to providing an accurate
description of the environment.
The difference between explicit and action-­
oriented models can be
appreciated if we consider dif­fer­ent ways one can model (for example) a
rodent trying to escape from a maze in which some corridors are dead ends.
An explicit generative model may resemble a cognitive map of the maze
and provide a detailed characterization of external entities, such as specific locations, corridors, and dead ends. This model may permit the rodent
to escape from the maze using map-­based navigation. An action-­oriented
model may instead encode contingencies between whisker movements and
touch sensations. This latter model would afford the se­lection of contextually appropriate strategies, such as moving forward (if no touch sensation
is experienced or expected) or changing direction (in the opposite case)—­
eventually permitting the rodent to escape from the maze without explic­
itly representing locations, corridors, or dead ends. T
­ hese two kinds of
model prompt dif­fer­ent philosophical interpretations of Active Inference,
considering generative models as ways to ­either reconstruct the external
environment (explicit) or afford accurate action control (action oriented).
Fi­nally, as discussed in the field of morphological computation (Pfeifer and
Bongard 2006), some aspects of a creature’s or a robot’s control can be outsourced to the body and hence do not need to be encoded in its generative
model. One example is the passive dynamic walker: a physical object resembling a h
­ uman body, composed of two “legs” and two “arms,” which is able
to walk an incline with no sensors, motors, or controllers (Collins et al.

Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/oa-monograph-pdf/2246566/book_9780262369978.pdf by guest on 24 March 2026

122

2016). This example implies that at least some aspects of locomotion (or
other abilities) can be achieved with body mechanics that are carefully tuned
to exploit environmental contingencies (e.g., an appropriate body weight or
size to walk without slipping); therefore, t­ hese contingencies do not need to
be encoded in the creature’s generative model. This suggests an alternative
way to design Active Inference agents (and their bodies) that are—as opposed
to have—­good models of their environment. Yet all the ways to design Active
Inference models are not mutually alternative but can be appropriately combined, depending on the prob­lem of interest.
6.7 Simulating, Visualizing, Analyzing, and Fitting Data
Using Active Inference
In most practical applications, once the generative model and generative
pro­cess have been defined, one only needs to use the standard procedure
of Active Inference—­the descent of the active and internal states on the
free energy functional associated with the model—to obtain numerical
­
results. Arguably, modelers’ goals are to simulate, visualize, analyze, and fit
data (e.g., conduct model-­based data analy­sis). Standard routines for Active
Inference that provide support for all ­these functions are freely available
(https://­www​.­fil​.­ion​.­ucl​.­ac​.­uk​/­spm​/­); an annotated example of using ­these
routines is provided in appendix C.
Although in most cases Active Inference procedures function off-­the-­
shelf, in some practical applications one may consider specific fine-­tunings
or changes. For example, specifying the temporal depth of planning defines
how many ­future states are considered during expected ­free energy computations. Setting up a ­limited temporal depth, along with other approximations to exhaustive search such as sampling (Fountas et al. 2020), may be
useful in practical applications of Active Inference in large state-­spaces.
Another example of adapting the standard functioning of Active Inference is the selective removal of parts of the expected ­free energy equation.
This ablation may be useful to compare standard Active Inference (that uses
expected ­free energy) with reduced versions, in which some parts of the
expected ­free energy are suppressed to render them formally analogous to
(for example) KL control or utility maximization systems (Friston, Rigoli
et al. 2015). Furthermore, one can also augment Active Inference models
with additional mechanisms, such as habitual learning (Friston, FitzGerald

Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/oa-monograph-pdf/2246566/book_9780262369978.pdf by guest on 24 March 2026

A ­Recipe for Designing Active Inference Models

123

et al. 2016) or learning rate modulation (Sales et al. 2019), with the caveat
that maintaining the normative character of Active Inference would require
casting ­these additional mechanisms in terms of ­free energy minimization.
Fi­nally, other fine-­tunings or changes to Active Inference may be useful
to characterize disorders of inference and psychopathological conditions—­
for example, to explore the behavioral and neuronal consequences of endowing a creature’s generative model with excessively strong (or weak) priors
via excessively high (or low) levels of neuromodulators. We ­will provide
some examples of Active Inference models that are relevant for psychopathology in chapter 9.
6.8 Summary
In this chapter, we have outlined the most impor­tant design choices that
must be made in setting up an Active Inference model. We provided a ­recipe
in four steps and some guidelines to address the usual challenges that model
designers face. Of course, it is not necessary to follow the r­ ecipe in a rigid manner. Some steps can be inverted (e.g., design the generative pro­cess before the
generative model) or combined. But in general, ­these steps are all required.
This sets up the remainder of this book, which puts ­these ideas into practice
through a series of illustrative examples designed to showcase the theoretical
princi­ples presented in the first half of the book. In every­thing that follows,
the only differences among the examples rest on the design choices we have
highlighted ­here. Part 2 illustrates systems with dif­fer­ent bound­aries, with
discrete or continuous dynamics at dif­fer­ent timescales, for which the choice
of prior beliefs is fundamental in reproducing be­hav­ior across many dif­fer­ent
domains—­but all implementing the same Active Inference.

Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/oa-monograph-pdf/2246566/book_9780262369978.pdf by guest on 24 March 2026

Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/oa-monograph-pdf/2246566/book_9780262369978.pdf by guest on 24 March 2026

7

Active Inference in Discrete Time

What I cannot create, I do not understand.
—­Richard Feynman

7.1 Introduction
So far, we have discussed the princi­ples of Active Inference at a relatively
abstract level. This chapter deals with specific examples—­and how they may
be specified in a practical setting. We focus on models of categorical variables in discrete time. Through a series of examples, building in complexity,
we illustrate models of perceptual pro­cessing, decision-­making, information
seeking, learning, and hierarchical inference. ­These examples are chosen to
highlight as simply as pos­si­ble emergent properties—­including mea­sur­able
physiology and be­hav­ior—of Active Inference schemes.
7.2 Perceptual Pro­cessing
We begin by considering perceptual pro­cessing and the inversion of the
sort of discrete-­time models introduced in chapter 4. L
­ ater in this chapter,
we build to a full partially observable Markov decision pro­cess (POMDP).
However, we start with a special case of a POMDP in which we can ignore
choices and be­hav­ior: a hidden Markov model (HMM), which may be used
for perceptual inference of a sequential and categorical sort (see figure 7.1).
To motivate this, we w
­ ill appeal to a s­ imple example. Imagine listening to
a per­for­mance of a short piece of ­music. The sequence of notes that are
written in the score may be thought of as hidden (unobserved) states, while
the sequence of notes we actually hear are the (observable) outcomes. If
the performer is a professional musician, the correspondence between the

Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/oa-monograph-pdf/2246566/book_9780262369978.pdf by guest on 24 March 2026

126

sτ–1

D

B

sτ

B

sτ+1

D P(s1)

A

A

A

A P(oτ | sτ)

oτ–1

oτ

oτ+1

B P(sτ+1 | sτ)

Figure 7.1
This hidden Markov model uses the same notation introduced in chapter 4 to express
a sequence of states (s) that evolve through time. At each time, they give rise to an
observable outcome (o). The state at one time depends only on the state at the previous time (with this de­pen­dency expressed in B). The first state in the sequence has
prior probability D. The generation of outcomes from states depends on the likelihood distribution (A). This specification of an HMM is generic, with specific generative
models depending on specific choices for A, B, and D.

hidden states and the outcomes may be very close. However, if an a
­ mateur,
­there may be an additional degree of stochasticity in the (likelihood) mapping from the note that should be played to that which is heard. In this scenario, it may still be pos­si­ble to infer which note should have been heard,
given prior beliefs about the probability that each note is preceded or succeeded by another.
The example of listening to the amateur musician may be formalized in
the following way. First, we decide on how reliably our musician actually
plays the note (outcome) she intends to (hidden state). We can express this
through the A-­matrix, whose ele­ments indicate the probability of an outcome
(rows) given a state (columns). In our toy example, we set this as follows:
⎡ 7
1 ⎢⎢ 1
A=
10 ⎢ 1
⎢ 1
⎣

1
7
1
1

1
1
7
1

1 ⎤
⎥
1 ⎥
1 ⎥
7 ⎥⎦

(7.1)

This says that 70 ­percent of the time, our musician hits her intended note.
We then specify the transition probabilities in the B-­matrix, which account
for the probability of the next state (rows) given the current state (columns):
⎡ 1 1 1 97 ⎤
1 ⎢⎢ 97 1 1 1 ⎥⎥
B=
100 ⎢ 1 97 1 1 ⎥
⎢ 1 1 97 1 ⎥
⎦
⎣

(7.2)

Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/oa-monograph-pdf/2246566/book_9780262369978.pdf by guest on 24 March 2026

Active Inference in Discrete Time

127

This says that t­here is a 97 ­percent probability of the first note being followed by the second, the second by the third, and so on. If we know that
the sequence always begins with the first note, we set the prior probability:
⎡1 ⎤
⎢0 ⎥
D=⎢ ⎥
⎢0 ⎥
⎢ ⎥
⎣⎢ 0 ⎦⎥

(7.3)

Together, equations 7.1–7.3 completely specify the HMM generative
model shown in figure 7.1. In other words, they provide a description of our
beliefs about how the ­music we hear is generated by our amateur musician.
Using equation 4.12 and substituting in our generative model, we can simulate the dynamics of the Bayesian belief updating induced by a sequence
of outcomes. This is shown in figure 7.2. Note the increase in confidence
shown in the upper-­left plot as more data are accumulated over time, except
for the third time step, where an unexpected outcome has occurred. This
outcome could be explained in two ways. First, it may be that the intended
note ­really was an unusual note ­under our prior beliefs in equation 7.2. This
is made less likely by the rarity of such transitions ­under the B-­matrix of
this model. The alternative, more plausible explanation is that the musician
played the wrong note by m
­ istake. As shown in the third column of the
upper-­right plot, this is the explanation that our simulated listener s­ettles
on. However, a nonzero probability is assigned to the possibility that it was
the right note ­after all. The capacity to report this sort of uncertainty is a key
feature of the Bayesian perspective afforded by Active Inference.
The model shown ­here may be made more sophisticated in many ways,
but perhaps the simplest relies on the factorization of the state-­space (Mirza
et al. 2016). An example might be the pitch and dynamics of the note (with
a similar distinction in the outcomes). In a visual inference task, the factorization may be into what and where, which has a ­great deal of currency
in neurobiology (Ungerleider and Haxby 1994). In subsequent sections, we
­will appeal to this sort of factorization to separate ­those states that can be
influenced by the creature in question from ­those that cannot. For further
reading on this sort of model (without actions in play) and the kinds of
neuronal message passing scheme that might be used to invert it through
minimizing f­ ree energy, see Parr, Markovic et al. (2019).

Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/oa-monograph-pdf/2246566/book_9780262369978.pdf by guest on 24 March 2026

128

1

sτ

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0

1

2

3

4

5

s1